An Evolutionary Model of the Universe
We consider a multiverse—a population of universes—separated into discrete and ordered generations. We assume that every generation contains a large, finite number of universes, and we allow for an infinite number of generations. Every universe contains a non-negative integer number of black holes, and we assume a one-to-one mapping between the black holes in that generation and the universes in the next generation.

We consider a particular generation, and we denote the number of universes in this focal generation by $ n \in \mathbb{N} $ (i.e., a natural number, excluding zero). We assign each of these universes a unique index $ i \in I $, and we denote its number of black holes by $ b_i \in \mathbb{N}_0 $ (i.e., a natural number, including zero). We assume at least one black hole to be present in this generation, such that a subsequent generation does exist 13, but we allow for individual universes to contain zero black holes, in which case they have no descendants in any subsequent generation. We are interested in a set of $ N $ characters that vary between universes and are causally responsible for the number of black holes that form within each universe. We denote the value of a focal character in the $ i $ th universe by $ c_i \in \mathbb{R} $ (i.e., a real number). The ordered list of $ N $ character values in the $ i $ th universe defines this universe's “character type,” which is denoted by $ t_i \in \mathbb{R}^N $. The functional relationship between character type and the manufacture of black holes is captured by $ b_i = B(t_i) $. This assumes that universes develop deterministically, but we also provide results for stochastic development of universes in the Appendix. We allow for arbitrarily complicated interactions between a universe's constituent character values in determining its success in manufacturing black holes. Finally, we allow for any degree of heritability between parent and offspring universes, and we denote the focal character's arithmetic average value across the offspring of the $ i $ th universe by $ \bar{c}_i = c_i + \Delta c_i $, where $ \Delta c_i \in \mathbb{R} $.
