Connecting Process and Purpose
We now establish mathematical correspondences between the dynamical Eq. 2 that formally captures the process of CNS, and the optimization program (4) that formally captures the design objective of the universe. Two concepts are of interest here. First, the idea of a “scope for CNS”: there is no scope for CNS if the action of CNS on the focal character is necessarily zero and, if this is not the case, then there is scope for CNS 19. Second, the idea of a “potential for positive CNS”: there is no potential for positive CNS if there is no character type that would be favored by CNS if we were to introduce it into the multiverse by mutation of one of the existing universes, and there is potential for positive CNS if there is at least one character type that would be favored by CNS if we were to introduce it into the multiverse by mutation 19. Scope for CNS pertains to variation already present in the focal generation; potential for positive CNS pertains to variation that may subsequently arise.

The mathematical correspondences between the dynamical action of CNS and the optimization program are listed in Table 1 (full details are given in the Appendix). The first five correspondences translate scenarios in the optimization view of the universe as having a design objective of black-hole manufacture into the dynamics of CNS. The sixth correspondence translates in the reverse direction. These are analogous to the six correspondences derived by Grafen 19, 22, Gardner and Grafen 23, and Gardner and Welch 24, in relation to the concept of fitness maximization in evolutionary biology. The view of the universe as a purposeful object that is functioning to manufacture black holes has a mathematical connection to the dynamics of CNS in Smolin's 12-14 conception of the evolution of the multiverse. Put another way, CNS acts as if according to a design objective of black-hole maximization, such that successive generations of universes will be increasingly contrived—that is, appearing designed—as if for the purpose of forming black holes.

|Numeral|Correspondence|
---|---|
I|If all universes are optimal, there is no scope for CNS|
II|If all universes are optimal, there is no potential for positive CNS|
III|If all universes are suboptimal, but equally so, there is no scope for CNS|
IV|If all universes are suboptimal, but equally so, there is potential for positive CNS|
V|If universes vary in their optimality, then there is scope for CNS, and the change in the arithmetic average of every character value owing to CNS is equal to its covariance with relative attained maximand value|
VI|If there is neither scope for CNS nor potential for positive CNS, then all universes are optimal|