Cosmological Natural Selection

We denote the arithmetic average number of black holes produced per universe across all universes in the focal generation of the multiverse by $b = \sum_{i \in I} p_i b_i$, where $p_i = 1/n$ is the weighting given to the $i$th universe in the focal generation (all $n$ universes having equal weighting). Similarly, we denote the arithmetic average of the focal character's value in the focal generation by $c = \sum_{i \in I} p_i c_i$, and we denote the arithmetic average value of the focal character in the subsequent generation by $c' = \sum_{i \in I} p_i' c_i'$, where $p_i' = (b_i/b) p_i$ is the total weighting given to the offspring of the $i$th universe in the focal generation (all offspring universes having the same weight). From Price's equation, the change in the arithmetic average of the focal character's value between these two generations is given by $\Delta c = c' - c$, or:

$$\Delta c = \text{cov}_I(b_i/b, c_i) + E_I[(b_i/b) \Delta c_i]$$

where $\text{cov}$ and $E$, respectively, denote a covariance and expectation, taken over the indicated set (see Appendix for details). Price's equation separates evolutionary change into two additive parts: a “selection” component, given here by the covariance term on the right hand side of Eq. 1, and a “transmission” term, given here by the expectation term on the right hand side of Eq. 1. The selection term arises as a consequence of a statistical association between a universe's character value and its production of black holes. The quantity appearing alongside character value in the covariance is, in the context of evolutionary genetics, termed the “target of selection”; that is, relative Darwinian fitness. Thus, the fitness of the $i$th universe is given by its ability to produce black holes, $b_i$. The transmission term arises as a consequence of offspring differing from their parents, that is, imperfect inheritance of character values, $\Delta c_i \neq 0$. Such nonselective effects arise in evolutionary genetics as a consequence of processes such as spontaneous mutation and meiotic drive. In the context of CNS, the transmission term captures “mutational” differences between parent and offspring universes.
We can thus formalize the action of CNS as the change in the arithmetic average of the focal character's value owing to differential black-hole production across universes, or:

$$\Delta_S c = \text{cov}_I(b_i/b, c_i) $$