INTRODUCTION
Between distances of 10−21 and 1026 m, physical reality is accurately described by the Standard Model of particle physics and the ΛCDM cosmological model 1, 2. Together, these contain ∼30 input parameters 3, which are known to be constant across cosmological distances to within approximately one part in 100,000, with no strong evidence that they vary at all in time or space (e.g., see 4). These include inter alia the strengths of the three fundamental forces, α SU(3), α SU(2), and α U(1) and the Yukawa couplings (masses) of the elementary particles, such as ye, yµ, and yτ. The precise numerical values of these constants determine much of the physics of our universe and pose a double conundrum for physicists and philosophers. First, the values have a high degree of arbitrariness: they are dimensionless parameters that range over eight orders of magnitude, for no known reason. Second, it is generally acknowledged that even rather small modifications to some of these values would lead to universes that are vastly less complex than our own (Ref. [ 3; but see Ref. [ 5 for a contrary view).

For example, the cosmological constant Λ—that is, the background energy density of the universe—is empirically shown to be approximately equal to the mass-energy density of one hydrogen atom per cubic meter 6, 7. However, quantum field theory implies the existence of calculable contributions to Λ that are 60 orders of magnitude larger than this observed value (for a detailed review, see Ref. [ 8). Although such predicted values are theoretically natural, the corresponding universe would expand so quickly that there would appear to be no possibility of matter accumulating to form stars, galaxies, and life. In fact, galaxy formation—which is probably necessary for the existence of life—appears to require that Λ be within a few orders of magnitude of its observed value 9. A second example is the neutron–proton mass difference. The neutron (mass 1.675 × 10−27 kg) is heavier than the proton (mass 1.673 × 10−27 kg) by ∼0.1%. A free neutron decays to a proton with a half-life of 886 s. If the mass difference were reversed, the proton would be unstable and free protons would decay to neutrons via the weak interaction. This would render hydrogen unstable, and chemistry—as conventionally understood—would not exist.

Why does the universe appear so contrived? A popular answer is to invoke observer bias. In particular, the “weak anthropic principle” notes that only a universe that supports life may be observed by its residents, so we should not be surprised to find that our universe supports life 10, 11. However, some have found this explanation unsatisfying. For example, if there is only one universe, then the weak anthropic principle explains why it is complex given that it is observed, but does not explain why it complex and observed rather than simple and unobserved (see Ref. [ 11 for a detailed review). Consequently, an alternative explanation has been proposed by Smolin 12-14: the fundamental constants of nature might have been literally fine-tuned, by a process of cosmological natural selection (CNS). Specifically, Smolin 12-14 suggests that there is a population of universes—the “multiverse”—in which individual universes vary in their fundamental constants, and give birth to offspring universes via the formation of black holes, with some fidelity of transmission of fundamental constants between parent and offspring. Thus, those universes that are more likely to form black holes leave more descendant universes than their counterparts, resulting in successive generations of universes being better adapted for black-hole formation. Under this view, certain phenomena—such as atoms and stars—are simply means to the end of forming black holes, and life itself is merely an evolutionary byproduct.

This idea relies on several important assumptions, all of which are controversial. First, it is key to the ideas of Smolin 12-14 that the endpoint of black-hole formation is actually a new universe, rather than simply a quantum-mechanical state that will decay over time and ultimately disappear through Hawking radiation. In the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence (a surprising isomorphism between d-dimensional gauge theory and d + 1-dimensional gravity; 15), the formation and subsequent decay of a black hole occurs as a regular and unitary procedure within the dual field theory. This does not show evidence for the formation of new universes. Furthermore, a black hole has a finite entropy, given by S = A/4, where A is the area of the horizon in units of Planck length squared. Associated with this entropy should be a finite number of microstates, eS, which should include the baby universes. However, while black-hole entropy is large, it is finite and, in particular, smaller than the entropy that would naturally be associated with a daughter universe.

Second, Smolin 12-14 suggests that the fundamental constants can change during the formation of new universes, but no physical mechanism is known to account for this. Third, Smolin 12-14 assumes that the new universe inherits the constants of the previous universe, up to small variations. However, in the context of the multiverse, one should expect not just the constants of the Standard Model to be ambient, but also the gauge group (set of forces) and particle content of the Standard Model to be ambient properties as well. In this case, one would expect far more dramatic changes to the physical laws (e.g., the absence of electromagnetism as a long-range force) than simply a change in numerical constants. These are all substantial caveats (see 16 for an in-depth review). Here, we proceed on the assumption that they are surmountable.

A separate concern is that Smolin's 12, 14 formal presentation of the CNS argument is nonstandard from the viewpoint of evolutionary biology, which has developed a powerful mathematical toolkit for examining the action of selection and consequent adaptation, in any medium. Specifically, Price's 17, 18 equation of evolutionary genetics has generalized the concept of selection acting upon any substrate and, in principle, can be used to formalize the selection of universes as readily as the selection of biological organisms. In this article, we will use Price's equation to formally capture the action of CNS, and we will use an optimization program to formally capture the idea that the purpose of the universe is to promote the formation of black holes. We will establish links between these two mathematical objects, confirming that CNS operates as if according to the design principle of black-hole formation, so that—in a formal sense—successive generations of universes will appear increasingly well designed to produce black holes.